---
title: '04-05. 2023'
date: 2023-06-30T11:23:59+02:00
draft: false
---

### The World of Yesterday
- **By.** Stefan Zweig.
- **When.** 1942.
- **Notes.** This book is quite unique. A hommage to Europe and its people. One gets the impression that SZ is already an angel when writing, looking down at himself from heaven. Although the book is meant to be an autobiography, SZ mostly writes about his friends. He basically attributes everything he has learned to others. A very moving book.

### Darkness at Noon
- **By.** Arthur Koestler.
- **When.** 1940.
- **Notes.** Just as any good dystopia, this book was disturbing. Because the entire novel takes place inside a prison, I found this book more disturbing than, *1984* and *Brave New World*. AK explores the relationship between history and politics and how much (or little) it takes to brainwash someone.
- **Quotes.**
    - page 72. "A mathematician once said that algebra was the science for lazy people - one does not work with $x$, but operates with it as if one knew it. In our case, $x$ stands for the anonymous masses, the people. Politics means operating with this $x$ without worrying about its actual nature. Making history is to recognize $x$ for what it stands for in the equation." [Rubashov]
    - page 121. "Because my way of thinking and of arguing is your own, and you are afraid of the echo in your own head. In a moment you will be calling out: Get thee behind me, Satan..." [Ivanov]
    - page 122. "In old days, temptation was of carnal nature. Now it takes the form of pure reason." [Ivanov]

