---
title: "On good conversations"
date: 2025-05-11
tags: ["essay", "rationality"]
draft: true
---

Life involves plenty of hard decisions. Should I switch jobs? Should I marry him? Should I move abroad? Then there are the "easy" decisions: which pyjama to wear or which brand of milk to buy. It doesn't matter which option you pick. But choosing - figuring out your options and picking one - is hard. In fact, I would expect the optimisation problem to be NP-hard. Here's Zvi:

> When you have a choice, you must stop what you’re doing, and choose.
> [...]
> Making a random slash arbitrary choice might not be hard (although sometimes it is) but first you have to choose to choose at random. [If you choose not to decide, you still have made a choice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OnxkfLe4G74). There’s no escape! You certainly don’t want to be making  [*that* choice](http://pickatrandom.com/) at [random times](https://www.random.org/clock-times/)!

This leads to decision fatigue.

### I. Understanding the problem
Most of us are aware that choosing is draining. Steve Jobs wore black turtlenecks to reduce the number of decisions in a given day. *Should I Stay or Should I Go* is basically a three-minute rant about the agony of making decisions[^amanda]. The reason going to IKEA can be so tiring is that it involves making a ridiculous number of choices. Getting to choose among many options is only fun up to a certain point.

According to Wikipedia, decision fatigue is "the deteriorating quality of decisions made by an individual after a long session of decision making". This is well known in the marketing world. The reason supermarkets place all the goodies next to the cashier is that we're more likely to give in to cravings after having finished shopping.

Decision fatigue arises from a broader phenomenon called ego depletion. Intuitively, this is the idea that willpower works like a battery. If we exert a lot of mental effort at one task, then we cannot exert as much mental effort at subsequent tasks without recharging. Making decisions drains our willpower battery.

The phenomena of decision fatigue and ego depletion have been demonstrated in a number of amusing studies. The most famous study on ego depletion is probably the study on Israeli judges, showing that judges were much less likely to give parole closer to lunch.

In another study, psychologists studied the effect of making decisions on willpower. People who were asked to make a decision before asked to keep their hand in a bucket of ice-cold water for as long as possible didn't hold out as long.

Computer science offers another way to think about decision fatigue. While a psychologist might speak of ego depletion, a computer scientist might speak of computational complexity. Here's from *Algorithms to Live By*:

> "One of the implicit principles of computer science, as odd as it may
sound, is that computation is bad: the underlying directive of any good
algorithm is to minimize the labor of thought. When we interact with other
people, we present them with computational problems—not just explicit
requests and demands, but implicit challenges such as interpreting our
intentions, our beliefs, and our preferences. It stands to reason, therefore,
that a computational understanding of such problems casts light on the
nature of human interaction."

Further, the authors go on to advocate for what they call "computational kindness". When interacting with people, we should try sharing the computational cost of making decisions. If you prefer a particular restaurant, don't hesitate to indicate your preference. Although you're trying to be polite by saying you're indifferent, the other person might be relieved to hear you're craving Thai food.

## II. Antidotes

### Noticing
The first step in reducing decision fatigue is to notice it (as with so much else related to mental well being!) This is easier said than done, though. Because the phrase "decision fatigue" isn't common parlance, we may not think in terms of decision fatigue.

For example, I recently planned a trip to London, booking flights, finding accommodation, coordinating with others, etc. Because I was excited about the trip, I didn't notice when decision fatigue kicked in. If I'd known that it was decision fatigue, I wouldn't have planned the trip in as much detail.

I don't know how to best notice decision fatigue. One can always practise the skill of noticing, although it takes a lot of time. Other than that, one can try internalising that deciding has a price. Zvi's did this by listing nine reasons reasons choices are "really bad". Another strategy for noticing decision fatigue is to try identifying situations involving many choices and recalling how it felt. For instance, typical triggers of decision fatigue might be shopping, planning or coordinating with others. Whenever I feel analysis paralysis, or find myself overthinking, I'll take it as a sign of decision fatigue.

### But then what?
Luckily, once you know you're experiencing decision fatigue, dealing with it is easy.

We can cut out a surprising number of insignificant choices from our everyday lives. by coming up with default actions for various situations. For example, I don't want to only wear black turtlenecks, but I do have a default outfit - a uniform of sorts. In Google Calendar, I also have a calendar describing my ideal week, so I don't have to decide which lectures to attend on a day-to-day basis. Or at the supermarket: pick the cheapest toothpaste.

Easy non-recurring choices can be batched, so one doesn't go into choosing mode too often. One can even gamify the experience of making choices. For instance, I could have challenged myself to plan the trip within a given time frame. Many people have a fixed time each week for going through practicalities and planning the week ahead. This seems like a good moment to do get away with some choices.

How about hard non-recurring choices? Talk with people in a good position to help you. Depending on the choice you're facing, this might be friends, family or coworkers. But it need not be people you know well. In general, people are friendly! If you reach out to a vague acquaintance knowledgeable about the options you're contemplating, explaining your situation, chances are they'll want to help. This can feel strange, especially if you're coming from an individualist country. But this isn't about being dependent - it's just about not overcomplicating things.

## III.
One of the best things about being an adult is that you get to do whatever you want. But it's also one of the worst things about being an adult. Choosing is hard! But if you have a choice in the first place, maybe that's a good thing, after all.

[^amanda]: I recommend Swedish-speaking readers to listen to Amanda Ginsburg's [I de många valens land](https://open.spotify.com/track/2ESWovaZgVi3BMloGgukKw?si=ca868beba3e24129).
