---
title: "A taxonomy of examples"
date: 2025-06-29
tags: ["learning", "mathematics"]
draft: false
---

I'm mildly obsessed with examples. Whenever I feel confused, it's often because I don't know enough examples. Proofs can be confusing too, if some step is poorly explained. But that kind of confusion tends to be local. You can still have a good grasp of the theory. If you don't know enough examples, you feel generally lost. Textbooks lacking in examples end up being dry. In contrast, books with well-chosen examples are a pleasure to read[^recs].

According to the Cambridge Dictionary, an example is "something that is typical of the group of things that it is a member of".

In mathematics, there are many kinds of examples, and they all serve different purposes. Traditionally, fields like topology and measure theory place a greater emphasis on counter examples. In algebra, there are more prototypical examples; definitions are often followed by an exhaustive list of objects of that category[^df]. In the context of mathematics, the dictionary definition is too simplistic. So, what are our main classes of examples?

### Understanding definitions
First, there are the examples helping us understand definitions.

- Prototypical examples: examples just complex enough to capture the essential properties of an object.
	- Fundamental groups: the fundamental group of the circle $\pi_1(\mathbb{S}^1, x_0)$.
	- Transcendental field extensions: $\mathbb{Q}(\pi)$.
	- Modular forms: the Poincaré series $P_{m, k}(z)$.
- Canonical examples: the canonical construction of something - the construction you get which involves the least arbitrariness.
	- Stochastic processes: the coordinate process.
	- Embeddings into bi-duals: take the embedding $V \to V^{**}$ sending $v$ to the evaluation.
	- Rings: the integers $\mathbb{Z}$.
- Foundational examples: examples of special interest and which form the basis for further theory.
	- Anything analysis: the Gaussian $\phi(x) = e^{-x^2/2}$.
	- Stochastic processes: the simple random walk on $\mathbb{Z}$.
	- Modular forms: the $j$–invariant.
- Basic examples: the simplest possible instance of an object.
	- Groups: the trivial group $G := \{e\}$.
	- Martingales: the martingale $(X_t)_{t \ge 0}$ where $X_t \equiv 1$ for all $t$.
	- Banach space: just take $\mathbb{R}$.
- Non-examples: objects which are not instances of something.
	- A non-ring: the natural numbers $\mathbb{N}$.
	- A non-tempered distribution: the function $e^t$.
	- A non-Artinian ring: the integers $\mathbb{Z}$.
- Computational examples: examples involving a computation and that illustrate how to work with a given object.
	- Compute $\mathbb{R}[x] \otimes \mathbb{C}$.
	- Find the Euler product expansion for the Dirichlet generating series of the Möbius function $\mu = 1^{-*}$
	- Check that $c^{-1/2} W_{ct}$ is again Brownian motion.
- Pathological examples: examples illustrating distinctions between different notions, or the limitations of a certain concept.
	- Differentiability $\neq$ continuity: consider the Weierstrass function.
	- Connectedness $\neq$ path connectedness: because the Topologist's sine curve.
	- Lebesgue integral $\neq$ Riemann integral: try integrating the Dirichlet function, the characteristic function of the rationals.
- Toy examples: simple examples to manipulate in order to produce counter examples.
	- Random variable: define $$X := \begin{cases}\alpha, & \text{with probability } p, \\\ \beta, & \text{with probability } 1 - p.\end{cases}$$ 
	- Measure theory: simple functions.
	- Galois groups: consider $\mathrm{Gal}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{\alpha}):\mathbb{Q})$.
- Real-world examples: a real-world scenario involving the object of interest. These help motivate the study of the given object and are useful for gaining intuition.
	- Stochastic processes: a Poisson process as a description of the number of raindrops falling in a given square.
	- PDE: the heat equation.
	- Graph theory: a network models the flow of some fluid.

### Understanding results
Second, there are the examples helping us understand results. I'll count applications of theorems among these kinds of examples.

- Counter examples: examples illustrating how a given result breaks down if we drop assumptions[^counter].
	- Fatou's lemma: we really do need non-negativity. Consider the sequence $f_n := - 1_{[n, n+1]}$.
	- Open mapping theorem: surjectivity is necessary, since the zero map isn't open.
	- Nullstellensatz: the field $K$ must be algebraically closed. For $K = \mathbb{R}$, the ideal $I = (x^2 + 1)$ is maximal but not of the form $(x - a)$.
- Basic applications: checking that the conditions of a theorem are satisfied, apply the theorem and see what you get. These examples are particularly useful if the theorem statement seems involved.
	- Hurewicz' theorem: use it to find $H_1(\mathbb{S}^n)$.
	- Dedekind-Kummer: compute the factorisation of $(p)$ in a ring of integers.
	- Dirichlet's unit theorem: the theorem allows us to verify that $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{d})$ has finite unit group.
- Non-basic applications: or corollaries. Deduce something interesting from a theorem.
	- Optional stopping: allows you to compute laws of hitting times.
	- The ring of integers is Dedekind: this gives us a satisfying proof of Fermat's theorem for primes that are sums of squares.
	- Hausdorff-Young: an application of Riesz-Thorin tells us that the Fourier transform defines a bounded linear operator from $L^p$.
- Amusing applications: examples mentioned during lectures for amusement.
	- Borsuk-Ulam: there are two antipodal points on earth with the same temperature.
	- Mean-value theorem: you can catch someone over-speeding using the mean-value theorem.
	- Four colour theorem: you can colour a map using just four colours so no two adjacent countries have the same colour.

Are examples the core of mathematics? The answer is very much a matter of personal taste. I'd say yes. Apparently von Neumann once said

> "In mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used to them."

There's some truth to this. And the way we get used to things is by studying examples.

[^recs]: _Basic Category Theory_ or _The Napkin_ are amazing in this regard.
[^df]: In _Abstract Algebra_ by Dummit and Foote, some definitions are followed by more than ten (!) examples.
[^counter]: In my experience, memorising counter examples is the best way to memorise assumptions of a theorem. This is somewhat counter intuitive, given that this involves memorising more information.
