---
title: 'Tracking down dependencies'
date: 2025-02-23
tags: ["learning"]
---

One of the benefits of attending lectures is that lecturers tend to give some really good unsolicited advice every now and then. Last semester, a professor of ours digressed to talk about the importance of identifying the key ingredients of a result. He'd just concluded a rather long proof, and was about to clean the blackboard as he said that the result was elementary. See, you only need this one lemma from point-set topology (admittedly a bit niche, but easy to prove), and then the definition of the Fourier transform. Put that way, sure, maybe it's elementary. Explicitly writing down the dependencies of an idea, he said, was a good exercise.

I tried doing this a couple of times for definitions, theorem statements and proofs. At first, it felt a bit silly. Once I finished writing down the main components of a result, it seemed trivial. For bite-sized lemmas and propositions, it felt like a waste of time. But for more complicated theorems or involved definitions, it proved quite useful.

Let's do a concrete example. Suppose we're trying to understand martingales. Martingales can be thought of as sequences of random variables representing fair games: if we're given the value of the $n$:th random variable, we expect the value of the $(n+1)$:th random variable to stay the same. In other words, there's no predictable up- or downward trend. To be precise:

**Def.** Let $(X\_n)\_{n \in \mathbb{Z}\_+}$ be an adapted, real-valued random process, such that $E(|X\_n|) < \infty$ for every $n \in \mathbb{Z}\_+$. We say that the process $(X\_n)\_{n \in \mathbb{Z}\_+}$ is a martingale if, for every $n \in \mathbb{Z}\_+$, $$E(X_{n+1}|\mathcal{F}_n) = X_n.$$[^1] 
[^1]: Le Gall, J. F. (2022). *Measure theory, probability, and stochastic processes*. Cham: Springer.

We can recursively work out the dependencies:

- General terminology related to random processes
    - Adapted processes
    - Filtrations
- Conditional expectation
    - The definition of the conditional expectation with respect to a $\sigma$-algebra
    - What $E(X_{n+1}|\mathcal{F}_n)$ means, intuitively

And that's it. Once one has a solid grasp of the above notions, one is well on one's way to understanding martingales.

Here are the main benefits I've identified with this approach:

- **It makes you engage more with the material.** This is pretty self-explanatory. Learning a concept isn't just a matter of being able to regurgitate the contents of the lecture notes; it requires you to build some sort of inner mental model. The purpose of exercises, quizzes or review questions is to make you think more carefully about a given topic. Otherwise, because humans (or at least mathematicians) are lazy, chances are you'll go through the material too quickly. Tracking down dependencies is a bit like doing more problems, in that it prompts you to revisit the material.
- **It's easier memorising a short list of bullet points rather than big chunks of information.** This mostly applies when deconstructing proofs. For the most part, you do get by memorising just the dependencies. You can usually fill in the details yourself.
- **Once you've nailed down the dependencies, the concept seems much simpler.** Some results can seem quite daunting at first. But working out the dependencies makes the concept seem deceptively simple, thereby making the learning process much more enjoyable. (So, if you want the curse of knowledge, you know what to do.) Moreover, if you struggle to understand an idea but you're clear about the dependencies, you know what to do: read up on each of the topics involved. In this way, the dependencies translate into a checklist for your learning process.

Of course, tracking down dependencies for each concept one encounters is too time-consuming. But in some cases, it's definitely worthwhile.