---
title: "Normal settings with abnormal social norms"
date: 2025-11-23
draft: true
---

Most people lead a comfortable 9-5 life. You go to work, work away, go home, sometimes seeing friends, working out or pursuing hobbies. Even so, sometimes you find yourself in unusual social situations, where you learn a lot about yourself and others. Here are some situations, all relatively normal, with abnormal social norms.

### Flights
On a 12-hour flight, you'll find a cross section of the population bored, tired and without Internet. What happens? People nap[^telling], workaholics succumb to movie-watching, and some -- believe it or not -- venture to talk with strangers.

[^telling]: Is this telling of our society?

### Dates
It's common for people taking steps to get to know new people, for example by attending local meet-ups; however, friend-seekers rarely try getting to know others *well*. Dates are among the few situations where people deliberately try building deep connections. Think about it: the purpose of a date is for two people, usually strangers, to become romantic partners[^long]. Odd, right?

[^long]: Of some form or other.

### Parties
Parties where people get moderately tipsy are amusing. Moderately tipsy people are amusing -- they're a bit like children, candid and ignorant of social norms, though they enjoy discussing grown-up topics.

### Work interviews
A work interview is nothing at all like an ordinary conversation, despite appearances; it's like an improv play, where the interviewee does mind-reading to sell themself. The interviewee should present themself as the ideal employee: competent, reliable and a good coffee machine conversationalist. Any weaknesses of the interviewee are, naturally, just their virtues in excess: 'I'm somewhat stubborn, but that's just because I'm so driven.'

### Gym classes
In gym classes, forty-or-so sweaty people are carrying out strange-looking movements to music[^concert]. Though they're strangers, they share a sense of camaraderie and are surprisingly friendly with one another. An outsider might well think they're part of a cult[^kondi].

[^concert]: Music festivals are similar. There, you'll also have people chanting in unison and 
[^kondi]: Anyone at ETH will know which ASVZ class I mean.

### Summer camps
There are summer camps for kids as well as adults, though the latter are sometimes called 'retreats' or 'get-aways'. The goal of most summer camps is for a group of strangers to pursue a common interest together and to make new friends. Being in a remote place helps create a space for intimacy: the camp participants tacitly agree that 'what gets said here stays here'.

### Military service
Life in the military is famously totalitarian: it's all about obeying your superiors. And if you do mandatory military service, you're normally at the bottom of the pecking order. In no other setting there such a clear hierarchy, and in no other setting is outright bullying socially acceptable.

### Religious service
Religious services involve rites puzzling to non-believers. As part of religious services, people listen to religious leaders rambling in foreign languages, splash water on one another and put themselves in uncomfortable physical positions.

### Social games
These are all time-bound activities, disconnected from everyday life, usually physically or by means of clothing, with different social norms. These are social experiments, as it were: an alien wouldn't be able to guess how people would behave. And indeed -- first-t


