---
title: "Positive psychology for hobbyist historians"
date: 2026-01-11
tags: ["essay"]
draft: false
---

Books like *Factfulness* (2018) and *Enlightenment now* (2018) were very favourably received, partly because high-profile people were writing about the right things at the right time. More specifically, I suspect that these books largely owe their success to their feelgood component. Recall 2018: we had the Cambridge Analytica scandal, the Thunberg climate strikes, the murder of Jamal Khashoggi. Who wouldn't have wanted to hear an grandpa-like professor saying that things were still going pretty well?

I recently discovered a wellbeing hack: reminding oneself of positive historical events, or positive psychology for hobbyist historians. As I mentioned in [an earlier post](https://isabeldahlgren.github.io/the-varieties-of-optimal-experience/), I often think about the fall of the Berlin Wall -- not just because history is important, but also because it makes me happy. Here are other pieces of historical trivia which similarly fill me with a sense of awe and wonder:

- **Convivencia happened, at least a bit**: Around 800-1500 AD, Muslims, Jews and Christian communities peacefully coexisted in medieval Spain. This period is usually referred to as the 'convivencia' (Spanish for 'living together' or 'coexistence'). It wasn't just that they didn't kill people with other beliefs -- there even appeared to be significant cultural exchange[^debate]. After listening to the *In Our Time* [episode about Muslim Spain](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00548l1), I came away feeling very optimistic about human nature.
- **Dissolution of Soviet Union**: One could argue that the USSR dissolved without bloodshed: the USSR didn't end after a treaty following a bloody third world war. Though you might object that the Cold War wasn't bloodless, we could have had a nuclear war. Gorbachev seems to have been rather friendly, at least in comparison with the current Russian ruler, and he could have chosen to start a war when realising that the union was breaking down[^whimper].
- **Queen Christina doing her thing**: Ever since I was a child, I've been fascinated by Queen Christina of Sweden. Today, she has become something of a queer icon: she was a tomboy, preferring masculine hobbies and wearing men's clothes, and declared at 22 she'd never marry[^maxim][^other]. Five years later, the daughter of Gustav II Adolf, the king who died defending Protestantism in the Thirty Years' War, abdicated, converted to Catholicism and moved to Rome. A queer queen, indeed. To me, she represents the strength of the human spirit.

[^debate]: Historians debate whether convivencia was as utopian as it sounds.
[^whimper]: But he let his world -- the USSR -- end not with a bang but with a whimper.
[^maxim]: Christina wrote a large number of [maxims](https://www.adlibris.com/sv/bok/maximer-9789127170209) during her lifetime. One of them: 'It takes more courage to marry than to go to war'.
[^other]: She was learned too, mastering at least [five foreign languages](https://iep.utm.edu/wasa/#:~:text=Killed%20at%20the%20battle%20of,Stoics%2C%20notably%20Epictetus%20and%20Seneca.) in addition to her native Swedish and German. The queen was also keen on philosophy, having Descartes come to Stockholm and give her private lessons at 5am in the winter (the Frenchman soon caught a cold and died ten days later, no joke).

The poster for the [Leipzig '89 - Revolution Reloaded exhibition](https://www.dhm.de/en/exhibitions/archive/2022/leipzig-89-revolution-reloaded/) of the Deutsches Historisches Museum hangs on my wall. And in my hallway, there's a poem which (among other things) lists a number of noteworthy historical events, such as the glasnost. We must not forget history -- not just to prevent atrocities from repeating themselves -- but also to appreciate the present.
