---
title: 'Look for opinions'
date: 2025-03-30
tags: ["rationality"]
---

Opinionated people can be really annoying. Wherever they go, they try convincing you of their ideas. If you have an opinionated uncle, the Christmas dinner might be ruined by a bitter argument. I've certainly had bad experiences with a dinner-table conversations turning into feuds. For this reason, I used to try having fewer opinions. I implicitly assumed this meant being more liberal and open-minded. Well, no.

Actually, there are plenty of benefits of actively trying to form more opinions. Even about topics you don't know particularly well. If you learn with a view towards arguing, then you'll pay closer attention to the material. I think this has to do with anchoring. If you pick a stance, even at random, you'll be more emotionally invested. Holden Karnofsky summarised it neatly:

> By doing this [trying to have a hypothesis and rearticulating it whenever it changes], I try to **continually focus my reading on the goal of forming a bottom-line view, rather than just “gathering information.”** I think this makes my investigations more focused and directed, and the results easier to retain. I consider this approach to be **probably the single biggest difference-maker between "reading a ton about lots of things, but retaining little" and "efficiently developing a set of views on key topics and retaining the reasoning behind them."**[^1]

Moreover, chatting with people with strong opinions can also be fun. Say you're at a cocktail party. Small talk can be quite tiring, at least after a couple of hours. In this situation, I'll gladly talk to people trying to persuade me of their ideas. Or say you're hosting friends for dinner, and a friend explains her take on a topic you all like.

Back in school, we were encouraged to form more opinions. Teachers made us write argumentative essays about topics we hardly knew anything about. They know that most 14 year-olds don't care the slightest about whether fathers should be given two additional weeks of paternity leave, or if the capital income tax should be raised by 1%. But I don't think it was only meant as an exercise in communicating effectively. It felt as if teachers were saying "Go out there in the big wild world, and look for opinions!"

At this point, one might ask what prevents us from forming more opinions. Here are the reasons that stand out to me:

- **Fear of being wrong**: I think many people, whether they recognise it or not, resort to some kind of agnosticism for fear of being wrong. However, recognising you're wrong just means you're updating your beliefs. It's not that big of a deal. So stick your neck out.
- **Lack of confidence**: Many people think they aren't entitled to hold an opinion since they aren't "qualified". This is true for areas in which there's a clear distinction between experts and non-experts. But I have a hunch that we sometimes use this as an excuse for not looking into an issue. I've certainly been guilty of doing this. Anyway, I think there's a middle ground here: if you don't know all the technical details, just adjust your confidence levels.
- **Uncertainty**: Forming opinions about some topics might be really, really hard. For example, predicting technological progress is notoriously difficult. However, uncertainty isn't a good reason to not make up one's mind, especially if it's a pressing problem.

As long as one has some "epistemic etiquette" - being prepared to change your beliefs in the light of new evidence, and not taking everything so personally - having more opinions seems like a good thing. I'm currently trying to build the habit of always having a working hypothesis whenever I learn something new. Having more opinions makes you feel more like part of the world, rather than as a bystander.

[^1]: [Learning By Writing](https://www.cold-takes.com/learning-by-writing)
