---
title: "How to go OOD"
date: 2026-02-08
tags: ["rationality"]
draft: false
---

Every so often, I try remembering what Isabel was like one year ago. The more I cringe at younger me, the better -- it means that I changed, though I'm often unable to explain how. Perhaps the cringe-meter captures something which traditional end-of-year reflection prompts don't: my cringe-meter appears to measure the extent to which I've internalised new ideas, whether truisms about life or theoretical frameworks. Naturally, I'd like to speed up this learning process.

In my experience, this is largely a matter of getting exposed to new ideas. People sometimes call this 'leaving one's comfort zone', 'having a change of milieu' or 'going OOD' -- these are all rough paraphrases of the process I have in mind, and I'll invoke them at times.

I'll list a few classic ways to get exposed to new ideas and then offer some comments.

### Examples
Traveling might well be the definitive way to open one's mind -- young people have always gone abroad to do soul searching. In the 17th century, European aristocrats often undertook 'grand tours' around the age of 21; today, students are highly encouraged to do exchange programs.

Similarly, starting a new role is should expose you to new ideas. If you spend 40h per week at work, I bet something happens with you -- whether you notice or not. Maybe it's a change in attitude, values or language usage. For example, observe how quickly friends doing internships begin using business acronyms in everyday speech.

Studies can have the same effect. As a student, you spend much more than 40h per week at 'work', and you're surrounded by like-minded people. The university experience often entails complete immersion in some geek culture.

Of course, the content you learn can also have a mind-opening effect. For example, doing pure mathematics makes you appreciate precision (and see the lack of it everywhere). However, I assume subjects like history, literature or economics -- which concern our society more directly -- have a bigger potential to change one's outlook on everyday life.

Another class of 'learning experiences' come from particularly intense experiences: getting married, watching your favourite movie for the first time or having a good madeleine. Traumas, negative intense experiences, also fall under into this class.

### Comments
What can be said about these examples?

First, the extent to which you internalise new ideas appears to be a function of both intensity and duration -- it's the integral that matters, as it were. Not all stays abroad are formative experiences: you need to be away for sufficiently long, and the environment needs to be sufficiently different. Likewise, for work and studies, you need an element of novelty and time to parse the new information.

Second, you also need to make a conscious effort to learn -- experiencing major life changes isn't enough. This might well be why traveling is so effective. In none of the other examples is it as clear that you've deliberately left your comfort zone: you've literally left the comfort of home.

Third, the common theme for the first three examples -- traveling, work and studies -- is people. My most meaningful learnings have come from conversations with people I trust, whether dead or alive. Perhaps trust is what makes human contact so powerful.

*This blog post was inspired by a conversation with Elias Koschier about going OOD.*
