---
title: "Anki your life"
date: 2026-03-22
tags: ["learning", "rationality"]
draft: false
---

I'm rather distracted, forgetful and impulsive -- just as most humans. People use different gadgets to focus on what matters: bullet journals, to do-lists and pocket-sized notebooks. I'm currently exploring an alternative: Anki.

Anki has many use cases beyond cramming for exams. We use our memory all the time, and whatever is memory-dependent is potentially ankifiable. I've been experimenting with ways to use Anki for procedural knowledge, and for the formation of mental habits specifically.

### Examples
Here are some examples of how others have used Anki to 'develop a certain mentality'. I know this is a pretty vague goal, but I hope the examples will clarify.

To build a more accurate [world model](https://www.lesswrong.com/w/world-modeling), you could e.g. use Anki to memorise geography facts. My friend [Erik](https://lifeofleif.substack.com) leads a group [ankifying statistics from Our World in Data](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZX9ke2dqImAxr3rX-sRC5YOHbdPdbsss-K4zegjXmZ0/edit?tab=t.myyqqi9xz1ns#heading=h.inediu9gie1y). If you want to make Fermi estimates on the fly, you need some data stored in your head.

Similarly, an aspiring superforecaster might memorise forecasting tips and tricks. In *Superforecasting*, Philip Tetlock characterises the forecasting methods of superforecasters:

> In their methods of forecasting they [superforecasters] tend to be:
> - Pragmatic: Not wedded to any idea or agenda
> - Analytical: Capable of stepping back from the tip-of-your-nose perspective and considering other views
> - Dragon-eyed: Value diverse views and synthesize them into their own
> - Probabilistic: Judge using many grades of maybe
> - Thoughtful updaters: When facts change, they change their minds
> - Good intuitive psychologists: Aware of the value of checking thinking for cognitive and emotional biases

One way of translating this to Anki cards is by having a [top-level card](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7Q7DPSk4iGFJd8DRk/an-opinionated-guide-to-using-anki-correctly#How_to_keep_cards_short___Levels) with front 'Methods of superforecasters' and back 'PAD ProT Go' (some acronym which is memorable to me), possibly adding cards decoding the acronym (e.g. front: 'PAD Prot Go - first P'; back: 'Pragmatic').

Apparently [people (presumably Christians) have ankified parts of the Bible](https://ankiweb.net/shared/decks?search=bible) too, as a way to build character.

### Why would this work?
I find Anki quite effective for building mental habits. Here's my pop psych theory as to why.

Anki review sessions serve as periodic reminders. For example, suppose I want to make more data-driven judgements. Reviewing my Anki deck becomes like an affirmation of faith: each time I open the app, it's like saying: 'I'm doing this so I can make decisions grounded in actual data'. I find spaced repetition practise pretty boring, and I guess my subconscious motivational talk helps reinforce the habit.

And when it comes to adopting a certain mentality -- being data-driven, making accurate forecasts or, well, being a good Christian -- the main bottleneck might be forgetfulness. If only it occurred to you to compare against that baseline, to give probabilistic intervals rather than yes-no answers, or to think of the fifth commandment...

Maybe our schooling system is also supporting evidence that Anki can be used to build mental habits. I assume the ultimate goal of education is to instill certain mental habits. Memorisation is a key part of the humanist education program, tried and tested since the 1500s.

### Conclusions
Erik's project is called 'Anki The World' -- I suppose a natural summary of this post is 'Anki Your Life'. Both students and non-students have a lot to gain from building a consistent spaced repetition habit.
